README.rst, before:

======
MemCNN
======

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/circleci/build/github/silvandeleemput/memcnn/master.svg        
        :alt: CircleCI
        :target: https://circleci.com/gh/silvandeleemput/memcnn/tree/master

.. image:: https://readthedocs.org/projects/memcnn/badge/?version=latest        
        :alt: Documentation Status
        :target: https://memcnn.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/gh/silvandeleemput/memcnn/master.svg   
        :alt: Codecov branch
        :target: https://codecov.io/gh/silvandeleemput/memcnn

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/memcnn.svg
        :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/memcnn

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/implementation/memcnn.svg        
        :alt: PyPI - Implementation
        :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/memcnn

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/memcnn.svg        
        :alt: PyPI - Python Version
        :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/memcnn

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/github/license/silvandeleemput/memcnn.svg        
        :alt: GitHub
        :target: https://memcnn.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest

A `PyTorch <http://pytorch.org/>`__ framework for developing memory
efficient deep invertible networks

* Free software: `MIT license <https://github.com/silvandeleemput/memcnn/blob/master/LICENSE.txt>`__ (please cite our work if you use it)
* Documentation: https://memcnn.readthedocs.io.
* Installation: https://memcnn.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation.html

Features
--------

* Simple `ReversibleBlock` wrapper class to wrap and convert arbitrary PyTorch Modules into invertible versions.
* Simple switching between `additive` and `affine` invertible coupling schemes and different implementations.
* Simple toggling of memory saving by setting the `keep_input` property of the `ReversibleBlock`.
* Training and evaluation code for reproducing RevNet experiments using MemCNN.
* CI tests for Python v2.7 and v3.6 and torch v0.4, v1.0, and v1.1 and good test coverage.

Example usage: ReversibleBlock
------------------------------

.. code:: python

    # some required imports
    import torch
    import torch.nn as nn
    import numpy as np
    import memcnn.models.revop


    # define a new class of operation(s) PyTorch style
    class ExampleOperation(nn.Module):
        def __init__(self, channels):
            super(ExampleOperation, self).__init__()
            self.seq = nn.Sequential(
                                        nn.Conv2d(in_channels=channels, out_channels=channels,
                                                  kernel_size=(3, 3), padding=1),
                                        nn.BatchNorm2d(num_features=channels),
                                        nn.ReLU(inplace=True)
                                    )

        def forward(self, x):
            return self.seq(x)


    # generate some random input data (b, c, y, x)
    data = np.random.random((2, 10, 8, 8)).astype(np.float32)
    X = torch.from_numpy(data)

    # application of the operation(s) the normal way
    Y = ExampleOperation(channels=10)(X)

    # application of the operation(s) using the reversible block
    F, G = ExampleOperation(channels=10 // 2), ExampleOperation(channels=10 // 2)
    Y = memcnn.models.revop.ReversibleBlock(F, G, coupling='additive')(X)

Run PyTorch Experiments
-----------------------

.. code:: bash

    ./train.py [MODEL] [DATASET] --fresh

Available values for ``DATASET`` are ``cifar10`` and ``cifar100``.

Available values for ``MODEL`` are ``resnet32``, ``resnet110``,
``resnet164``, ``revnet38``, ``revnet110``, ``revnet164``

If not available datasets are automatically downloaded.

Results
-------

TensorFlow results were obtained from `the reversible residual
network <https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.04585>`__ running the code from
their `GitHub <https://github.com/renmengye/revnet-public>`__.

+------------+----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+----------+-----------+-----------+----------+
|            |               Tensorflow                          |               PyTorch                       |
+------------+----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+----------+-----------+-----------+----------+
|            |    Cifar-10            |      Cifar-100           |      Cifar-10        |     Cifar-100        |
+------------+----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+----------+-----------+-----------+----------+
| Model      | acc.     | time        | acc.      | time         | acc.     | time      | acc.      | time     |
+============+==========+=============+===========+==============+==========+===========+===========+==========+
| resnet-32  |  92.74   |  2:04       |  69.10    |      1:58    |  92.86   |  1:51     |  69.81    |  1:51    |
+------------+----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+----------+-----------+-----------+----------+
| resnet-110 |  93.99   |  4:11       |  73.30    |      6:44    |  93.55   |  2:51     |  72.40    |  2:39    |
+------------+----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+----------+-----------+-----------+----------+
| resnet-164 |  94.57   | 11:05       |  76.79    |  10:59       |  94.80   |  4:59     |  76.47    |  3:45    |
+------------+----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+----------+-----------+-----------+----------+
| revnet-38  |  93.14   |  2:17       |  71.17    |      2:20    |  92.80   |  2:09     |  69.90    |  2:16    |
+------------+----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+----------+-----------+-----------+----------+
| revnet-110 |  94.02   |  6:59       |  74.00    |      7:03    |  94.10   |  3:42     |  73.30    |  3:50    |
+------------+----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+----------+-----------+-----------+----------+
| revnet-164 |  94.56   | 13:09       |  76.39    |  13:12       |  94.90   |  7:21     |  76.90    |  7:17    |
+------------+----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+----------+-----------+-----------+----------+


The PyTorch results listed were recomputed on June 11th 2018, and differ
from the results in the ICLR paper. The Tensorflow results are still the
same.

Memory consumption of model training in PyTorch
-----------------------------------------------

============= =============
 Model        GPU VRAM (MB)
============= =============
resnet-32      766
resnet-110     1357
resnet-164     3083
revnet-38      677
revnet-110     706
revnet-164     1226
============= =============

Works using MemCNN
------------------

* `MemCNN: a Framework for Developing Memory Efficient Deep Invertible Networks <https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1KzqK1wz>`__ by Sil C. van de Leemput et al.
* `Reversible GANs for Memory-efficient Image-to-Image Translation <https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.02729>`__ by Tycho van der Ouderaa et al.
* `Chest CT Super-resolution and Domain-adaptation using Memory-efficient 3D Reversible GANs <https://openreview.net/forum?id=SkxueFsiFV>`__ by Tycho van der Ouderaa et al.

Citation
--------

Reference: Sil C. van de Leemput, Jonas Teuwen, Rashindra Manniesing.
`MemCNN: a Framework for Developing Memory Efficient Deep Invertible
Networks <https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1KzqK1wz>`__. *International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) 2018 Workshop Track.
(https://iclr.cc/)*

If you use our code, please cite:

.. code:: bibtex

    @inproceedings{
      leemput2018memcnn,
      title={MemCNN: a Framework for Developing Memory Efficient Deep Invertible Networks},
      author={Sil C. van de Leemput, Jonas Teuwen, Rashindra Manniesing},
      booktitle={ICLR 2018 Workshop Track},
      year={2018},
      url={https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1KzqK1wz},
    }

Commit message:

Modified README.rst, HISTORY.rst, updated Dockerfile
* Added latest PyPi version entry to HISTORY.rst
* Added better instructions how to run pytorch experiments.
* Provided an updated Dockerfile for installing the MemCNN environment (Python 3.6)
* Fixed some minor issues in docs/conf.py

README.rst, after:

======
MemCNN
======

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/circleci/build/github/silvandeleemput/memcnn/master.svg        
        :alt: CircleCI - Status master branch
        :target: https://circleci.com/gh/silvandeleemput/memcnn/tree/master

.. image:: https://readthedocs.org/projects/memcnn/badge/?version=latest        
        :alt: Documentation - Status master branch
        :target: https://memcnn.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/gh/silvandeleemput/memcnn/master.svg   
        :alt: Codecov - Status master branch
        :target: https://codecov.io/gh/silvandeleemput/memcnn

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/memcnn.svg
        :alt: PyPI - Latest release
        :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/memcnn

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/implementation/memcnn.svg        
        :alt: PyPI - Implementation
        :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/memcnn

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/memcnn.svg        
        :alt: PyPI - Python version
        :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/memcnn

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/github/license/silvandeleemput/memcnn.svg        
        :alt: GitHub - Repository license
        :target: https://github.com/silvandeleemput/memcnn/blob/master/LICENSE.txt

A `PyTorch <http://pytorch.org/>`__ framework for developing memory
efficient deep invertible networks

* Free software: `MIT license <https://github.com/silvandeleemput/memcnn/blob/master/LICENSE.txt>`__ (please cite our work if you use it)
* Documentation: https://memcnn.readthedocs.io.
* Installation: https://memcnn.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation.html

Features
--------

* Simple `ReversibleBlock` wrapper class to wrap and convert arbitrary PyTorch Modules into invertible versions.
* Simple switching between `additive` and `affine` invertible coupling schemes and different implementations.
* Simple toggling of memory saving by setting the `keep_input` property of the `ReversibleBlock`.
* Training and evaluation code for reproducing RevNet experiments using MemCNN.
* CI tests for Python v2.7 and v3.6 and torch v0.4, v1.0, and v1.1 and good test coverage.

Example usage: ReversibleBlock
------------------------------

.. code:: python

    # some required imports
    import torch
    import torch.nn as nn
    import numpy as np
    import memcnn.models.revop


    # define a new class of operation(s) PyTorch style
    class ExampleOperation(nn.Module):
        def __init__(self, channels):
            super(ExampleOperation, self).__init__()
            self.seq = nn.Sequential(
                                        nn.Conv2d(in_channels=channels, out_channels=channels,
                                                  kernel_size=(3, 3), padding=1),
                                        nn.BatchNorm2d(num_features=channels),
                                        nn.ReLU(inplace=True)
                                    )

        def forward(self, x):
            return self.seq(x)


    # generate some random input data (b, c, y, x)
    data = np.random.random((2, 10, 8, 8)).astype(np.float32)
    X = torch.from_numpy(data)

    # application of the operation(s) the normal way
    Y = ExampleOperation(channels=10)(X)

    # application of the operation(s) using the reversible block
    F, G = ExampleOperation(channels=10 // 2), ExampleOperation(channels=10 // 2)
    Y = memcnn.models.revop.ReversibleBlock(F, G, coupling='additive')(X)

Run PyTorch Experiments
-----------------------

If installed through pip:

.. code:: bash

    python -m memcnn.train [MODEL] [DATASET] [--fresh] [--no-cuda]


From cloned repository:

.. code:: bash

    ./train.py [MODEL] [DATASET] [--fresh] [--no-cuda]

* Available values for ``DATASET`` are ``cifar10`` and ``cifar100``.
* Available values for ``MODEL`` are ``resnet32``, ``resnet110``, ``resnet164``, ``revnet38``, ``revnet110``, ``revnet164``
* Use the ``--fresh`` flag to remove earlier experiment results.
* Use the ``--no-cuda`` flag to train on the CPU rather than the GPU through CUDA.

Datasets are automatically downloaded if they are not available.

Results
-------

TensorFlow results were obtained from `the reversible residual
network <https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.04585>`__ running the code from
their `GitHub <https://github.com/renmengye/revnet-public>`__.

+------------+----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+----------+-----------+-----------+----------+
|            |               Tensorflow                          |               PyTorch                       |
+------------+----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+----------+-----------+-----------+----------+
|            |    Cifar-10            |      Cifar-100           |      Cifar-10        |     Cifar-100        |
+------------+----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+----------+-----------+-----------+----------+
| Model      | acc.     | time        | acc.      | time         | acc.     | time      | acc.      | time     |
+============+==========+=============+===========+==============+==========+===========+===========+==========+
| resnet-32  |  92.74   |  2:04       |  69.10    |      1:58    |  92.86   |  1:51     |  69.81    |  1:51    |
+------------+----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+----------+-----------+-----------+----------+
| resnet-110 |  93.99   |  4:11       |  73.30    |      6:44    |  93.55   |  2:51     |  72.40    |  2:39    |
+------------+----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+----------+-----------+-----------+----------+
| resnet-164 |  94.57   | 11:05       |  76.79    |  10:59       |  94.80   |  4:59     |  76.47    |  3:45    |
+------------+----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+----------+-----------+-----------+----------+
| revnet-38  |  93.14   |  2:17       |  71.17    |      2:20    |  92.80   |  2:09     |  69.90    |  2:16    |
+------------+----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+----------+-----------+-----------+----------+
| revnet-110 |  94.02   |  6:59       |  74.00    |      7:03    |  94.10   |  3:42     |  73.30    |  3:50    |
+------------+----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+----------+-----------+-----------+----------+
| revnet-164 |  94.56   | 13:09       |  76.39    |  13:12       |  94.90   |  7:21     |  76.90    |  7:17    |
+------------+----------+-------------+-----------+--------------+----------+-----------+-----------+----------+


The PyTorch results listed were recomputed on June 11th 2018, and differ
from the results in the ICLR paper. The Tensorflow results are still the
same.

Memory consumption of model training in PyTorch
-----------------------------------------------

============= =============
 Model        GPU VRAM (MB)
============= =============
resnet-32      766
resnet-110     1357
resnet-164     3083
revnet-38      677
revnet-110     706
revnet-164     1226
============= =============

Works using MemCNN
------------------

* `MemCNN: a Framework for Developing Memory Efficient Deep Invertible Networks <https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1KzqK1wz>`__ by Sil C. van de Leemput et al.
* `Reversible GANs for Memory-efficient Image-to-Image Translation <https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.02729>`__ by Tycho van der Ouderaa et al.
* `Chest CT Super-resolution and Domain-adaptation using Memory-efficient 3D Reversible GANs <https://openreview.net/forum?id=SkxueFsiFV>`__ by Tycho van der Ouderaa et al.

Citation
--------

Reference: Sil C. van de Leemput, Jonas Teuwen, Rashindra Manniesing.
`MemCNN: a Framework for Developing Memory Efficient Deep Invertible
Networks <https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1KzqK1wz>`__. *International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) 2018 Workshop Track.
(https://iclr.cc/)*

If you use our code, please cite:

.. code:: bibtex

    @inproceedings{
      leemput2018memcnn,
      title={MemCNN: a Framework for Developing Memory Efficient Deep Invertible Networks},
      author={Sil C. van de Leemput, Jonas Teuwen, Rashindra Manniesing},
      booktitle={ICLR 2018 Workshop Track},
      year={2018},
      url={https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1KzqK1wz},
    }
